---
layout: post
title: The PR
date: 2019-12-14 14:00:00
categories: Post
---

So, this is it. The final step to making a change is getting it on the upstream. Feels like I ran a marathon the past few days to get here, but I am glad I stuck to it. It has been the most fun I've had while coding. If you've been following my last few posts ([Profiling], [Part1], [Part2]) you'll know I have been working on optimizing the [VSCodeVim/Vim] extension by improving the performance of a function called `HistoryTracker.addChange()`. On Part 1 I detailed the how and why of my first proposed change, and on Part 2 I went over the second change. These changes would greatly improve the performance of the extension by delaying the need to execute the entire function unless we absolutely need to. 

My changes have passed all current tests, but we have already identified a use case which was not taken into account. Moreover, the main maintainer of the package has made a suggestion to consider enumerating the special cases and treating them separately instead of treating all cases with the proposed changes. This means, there is further work to be done. I look forward to working with the community and getting my changes added to the codebase.

In case you're interested in following the state of my PR, here is a link to it: [Improved performance of addChange() #4380]. I suspect most communication will happen in there, but here is a link to the issue that calls attention to optimizing `HistoryTracker.addChange()`: [Investigate optimizing HistoryTracker.addChange() #3920].

Due to me messing up my master I had to cancel #4380 PR. We have moved over to [Implement _isDocumentTextNeeded() #4386]. I have made some modifications and moved my proposed to changes to a private method:

```ts
/**
 * Returns true if we need to get the entire document's text
 * to process an individual change
 */
private _isDocumentTextNeeeded(): boolean {
// Get the current document's text length.
const documentEnd = new Position(0, 0).getDocumentEnd();
const newTextLength = this.vimState.editor.document.offsetAt(documentEnd);

const isTextLengthDiff = this.oldText.length !== newTextLength;

// Determine if we just switched modes.
// This prevents recording steps in between start-end of a historyStep.
const isModeDiff = this.currentMode !== this.vimState.currentMode;

const isNewHistoryStep =
    (this.currentHistoryStepIndex === this.historySteps.length - 1 &&
    this.currentHistoryStep.isFinished) ||
    this.currentHistoryStepIndex !== this.historySteps.length - 1;

if (isModeDiff) {
    this.currentMode = this.vimState.currentMode;
}

// If all of these are false we can avoid requesting the entire doc.
return isTextLengthDiff || isNewHistoryStep || isModeDiff;
}

```

Part of my changes included making sure the previously mentioned edge case is covered. In addition, I created a test case ([#4385]) to make sure we don't break anything. My current suggestion to the upstream is that we explore the option of adding this as an experimental opt-in setting since `HistoryTracker.addChange()` remains completely unchanged.

[Profiling]:{{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2019-12-12-VsCodeVim %}
[Part1]:{{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2019-12-13-Optimizing-VSCodeVim-(Part-1) %}
[Part2]:{{site.baseurl}}{% post_url 2019-12-14-Optimizing-VSCodeVim-(Part-2) %}
[VSCodeVim/Vim]:https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim/issues/3920
[Improved performance of addChange() #4380]:https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim/pull/4380
[Investigate optimizing HistoryTracker.addChange() #3920]:https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim/issues/3920
[Implement _isDocumentTextNeeded() #4386]:https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim/pull/4386
[#4385]:https://github.com/VSCodeVim/Vim/pull/4385